---
title: "Consultation Process Pursuant to E.O. 13175: Consultation and Coordination with Indian Tribal Governments"
layout: page
sidenav: true
redirect_from:
    - /readingroom/OMB-Tribal-Consultation-Initiative.html
    - /readingroom/OMB-Tribal-Consultation-Initiative/
    - /OMB-Tribal-Consultation-Initiative/
---


The Office of Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation, a small independent agency, carries on meaningful dialogues with Native American entities as a regular part of daily agency business. Monthly, if not several times a month, members of our workforce meet with various tribal entities on aspects of our program. Most of these meetings are with local (Navajo Chapter) groups. We also, as necessary, meet with units of the central governments of the Navajo Nation and Hopi Tribe. Doing our work over the past 43 years, we have formed relationships with these groups, and find that it is easy and normal to collaborate on a regular basis.
Our agency’s primary task is to relocate tribal members who were living on land that was awarded to the other tribe pursuant to PL 93-531 and its associated Amendments Act of 1980, PL 96-305, 1988, PL 100-666, and 1991, PL 102-180. (See: 25 U.S.C. § 640d) These public laws were passed to achieve a final settlement of the long-standing dispute between the Navajo Nation and the Hopi Tribe. In resettling these families, we deal with various tribal entities every day. With 19 FTE’s available to us, (12 of which are filled by Navajo Nation members), our job is to decide who is eligible for benefits, then build or buy them a house. We consult with the relocatee families from the beginning to the end of the process. We provide pre-move counseling to inform the families of the options available in the selection of a home, to evaluate their economic status in determining where a relocation is most likely to be successful (given anticipated post-move living expenses), and to coordinate any other federal or state agency assistance activities that may be available and necessary. We provide a full range of real estate acquisition activities, including new construction contracting, acquisition of new and resale dwellings, and monitoring of any necessary warranty or housing repair programs. We have a post-move program that counsels these relocatees on basic maintenance of their home as well as the warranty that comes with each newly built home. We work diligently to ensure that relocatee dwellings meet all applicable decent, safe, and sanitary standards and building codes.
Because our agency is very small, we have had to contract out some of our work—and a number of those contracts went to tribal entities. 
To give you examples of our relationships with the Navajo Nation in particular (all the certified Hopi applicants living on Navajo land have already been relocated), the following are some of the basic programs where we collaborate:
1.	In our Eligibility department, we meet with the Navajo Hopi Legal Services Program. This arm of the Navajo Nation Department of Justice  interacts with our agency by handling individual appeals of applicants who have been initially denied benefits under our program both in the Agency administrative appeal process and in Administrative Procedure Act Appeals in the Federal Courts
2.	Our agency is responsible for having archaeological surveys of homesites chosen by our certified clients on the Navajo Nation performed. If these clients are not moving to a subdivision in the Navajo Nation that has already had all the required archaeological studies performed, we contract with the Navajo Nation Archaeology Department to have these studies performed. 
3.	The legal survey of the homesite lease area is performed by a Navajo contractor. The completed lease application, which includes the archaeological clearance, the legal survey plat, and NEPA clearances, is put together by our office and sent to the Navajo Nation for approval. Our homesite lease specialist regularly communicates with the Navajo Nation.
4.	When all these studies and surveys are completed, and the Navajo Nation  has issued a homesite lease for the area selected, we then utilize the Navajo Tribal Utility Authority (NTUA) to bring water and electricity to the site, and eventually connect these utilities to the home that is built. We have collaborated with NTUA and the Indian Health Service (IHS) to bring power and water to these areas by sharing the costs of utility projects with these two agencies. Most of the homes built are in remote areas (if they are not in a subdivision), so the costs of utilities are significant, and the collaboration time is extensive. As the homes are being built, our Housing Specialists have to coordinate bringing these utilities to the new home, thus our employees are meeting with NTUA and IHS on a regular basis.
5.	The Navajo—Hopi Settlement Act, as amended, gave the Navajo Nation the authority for a three-year period to acquire 400,000 acres as Navajo Trust Lands. After that three-year period, the authority to acquire the remaining acreage in Trust passed to ONHIR. Administrative and planning authority for the 400,000 acres was always vested in ONHIR.
6.	Most of the 400,000 acres was used to create the “New Lands” portion of the Navajo Nation. There remains about 12,000 acres to be selected and taken into Trust from the original 400,000 acres and in 2019 the Navajo Nation was granted the authority to deselect certain New Mexico lands and make a new selection. Thus, we communicate regularly with the Navajo Hopi Land Commission and its administrative staff. (This Commission represents the Navajo Nation on Trust land acquisition matters related to the Navajo—Hopi Settlement Act.)
7.	A ranger from the Navajo Nation Resource Enforcement Department is based out of one of our offices on the New Lands, and our employees meet with him regularly.
8.	Maintenance of roads and utility infrastructure on the new lands is the responsibility of the appropriate Federal or Tribal entities. (BIA Roads, or Navajo Tribal Utility Authority for water and power) The ONHIR provides maintenance for all New Lands buildings used by us, and ONHIR lease agreements for buildings owned by us but used by health provider agencies contain language specifying that the lessee is responsible for maintenance.
9.	We have a contract in place for repair of New Lands waterlines for situations in which the Navajo Tribal Utility Authority would not make needed repairs.
10.	As families started moving to the New Lands portion of the Navajo Nation, the need for a strong local government manifested itself. We helped establish the Nahata Dziil Commission Governance (NDCG) a Navajo Chapter coextensive with the New Lands. (Chapters are the local governing bodies on the Navajo Nation.) Over the years we have given NDCG grants to fund part of their operations to help them meet their responsibilities. In the past, we have also entered into contracts with NDCG to perform some of the duties for our agency. The largest of these contracts was to assist with fence building on the New Lands. Most of the New Lands have been developed for families who graze animals, so fence building and repair are very important activities. Again, our employees in the New Lands area meet with the NDCG regularly.
11.	Our Executive Director meets with the leadership of the Navajo Nation and Hopi Tribe when there are issues to discuss which affect either one or both of the Indian Nations and our agency. These discussions are collaborative and produce many opportunities to work together.
Our agency’s activities with the Hopi Tribe have included:
1.	Our agency gave the Hopi Tribe grants for property dismantlement for many years. As Navajo families moved off the Hopi lands, they had to leave their corrals, whatever would be left of their home, and any out-buildings behind. The Hopis then went onto these sites, salvaged what was possible, and discarded the rest. As a family was certified to move, our archaeologist would notify the Hopi Tribe of the physical location of their former property, which started the dismantlement process. Our agency collaborated with both the contracting office of the Hopi Tribe and the Office of Hopi Lands team that did the actual work on a regular basis.
2.	Our agency gave a grant to the Yawehloo Pahki (Spider Mound) community of the Hopi reservation. Since most of the families in this community at the time were relocatees and they needed to have a meeting area, we gave them a grant for a modular building. The design and construction of this building required one of our contracting staff to spend many hours in consultation and collaboration with this community. With his excellent relationships with these people, he was able to help them complete a much-needed project.
3.	Our Executive Director meets with the leadership of the Hopi Tribe as needed to discuss any problems or new actions to be considered.
As we plan for transition of remaining ONHIR functions to other entities of the federal government, our plan is to continue collaborating with both these Native American governments on a regular basis, at all levels of their governments. The Executive Order Designated Agency official with the responsibility to carry out this Executive Order is Christopher J. Bavasi, Executive Director, ONHIR. He can be contacted at (928) 779-2721.

 05/01/2020
